---
title: Witness Christianity---George Blaurock
---

# George Blaurock 

George Blaurock (a nickname for Jörg vom Haus Jacob, which means George of the House of Jacob), was one of the founders of a reform movement in the early 16th century that became known as the Swiss Brethren. He was the first of the Swiss Brethren to be baptized. This movement started in and around Zürich, Switzerland, where George and others were eventually imprisoned and persecuted by the Protestant rulers under the direction of the Protestant reformer, Ulrich Zwingli. George was eventually beaten and banished from Zürich because he refused to stop preaching and baptizing. The Protestant rulers of Zürich chose not to kill him because he was not a citizen of Zürich (his fellow-worker Feliz Manz, who was a citizen of Zürich, was drowned by the authorities at the same time as George was beaten and banished). He continued to travel and preach until he was eventually captured by the Roman Catholic authorities in southern Tyrol (in an area now included in modern-day Italy). They burned him at the stake, probably in 1529.

The following account from *The Chronicle of the Hutterian Brethren, Volume 1* is the earliest surviving record of George's baptism:

> At this point a man came from Chur, a priest named George from the house of Jakob, later known as Georg Blaurock. Once when they were discussing questions of faith, Georg shared his own views. Someone asked who had just spoken.“It was the man in the blue coat (blauer Rock).” So he was given this name because he had worn a blue coat. This same Georg had come because of his extraordinary zeal. Everyone thought of him as a plain, simple priest; but he was moved by God’s grace to holy zeal in matters of faith and worked courageously for the truth. He, too, had first approached Zwingli and discussed questions of faith with him at length, but he had got nowhere. Then he was told that there were other men more on fire than Zwingli. He inquired eagerly about them and met with them, that is, with Conrad Grebel and Felix Mantz, to talk about questions of faith. They came to unity about these questions. In the fear of God they agreed that from God’s Word one must first learn true faith, expressed in deeds of love, and on confession of this faith receive true Christian baptism as a covenant of a good conscience with God, serving him from then on with a holy Christian life and remaining steadfast to the end, even in times of tribulation.
>
> One day when they were meeting, fear came over them and struck their hearts. They fell on their knees before the almighty God in heaven and called upon him who knows all hearts. They prayed that God grant it to them to do his divine will and that he might have mercy on them. Neither flesh and blood nor human wisdom compelled them. They were well aware of what they would have to suffer for this.
>
> After the prayer, Georg Blaurock stood up and asked Conrad Grebel in the name of God to baptize him with true Christian baptism on his faith and recognition of the truth. With this request he knelt down, and Conrad baptized him, since at that time there was no appointed servant of the Word. Then the others turned to Georg in their turn, asking him to baptize them, which he did. And so, in great fear of God, together they surrendered themselves to the Lord. They confirmed one another for the service of the Gospel and began to teach the faith and to keep it. This was the beginning of separation from the world and its evil ways. [^1]

[^1]: *The Chronicle of the Hutterian Brethren, Volume 1*, pages 44-45

Two writings that George left were preserved in *The Martyrs Mirror*:

The first: 

> Lord God, I will praise you now and until my end; because you have given me faith, by which I have learned to know you. You send to me your divine word, which I am able to find and perceive that it is from pure grace. From you, O God, I have received it as you know. I firmly hope that it will not return to you empty. O Lord, strengthen my heart to this. My heart rejoices because I know your will. When I felt the heavy load of sin in me, which exceedingly troubled me, I would have had to perish and suffer everlasting pain, had you, O God, not come to me with the word of your divine grace. For this I will now magnify and praise your glorious name forever, because you always show yourself a merciful, dear Father. Cast me not off, but receive me as your child. Therefore I cry unto you, help, O Father, that I may be your child and heir. O Lord, strengthen my faith, else, if your help should not help me, my building should soon fall. Do not forget me, O Lord, but be with me always; your Holy Spirit protect and teach me, that in all my sufferings I may ever receive your consolation, so that, valiantly fighting, in this conflict, I may gain the victory.
>
> The enemy fights a battle with me in the field in which I now am; he would gladly drive me from the field. But you, O Lord, do give me the victory. He ran against me with sharp weapons, so that all my limbs quaked before the false doctrine and their constraints. But you, O Lord, had compassion upon me, and helped me, your son, poor man, with your grace, and powerful hand, and made me to overcome. O God, how soon did you hear me; you speedily came with your help, and turned back my enemies; therefore I will sing praises unto your name in my heart, and forever spread abroad the grace which has come to me.
>
> Now, I pray, Father, for all your children; preserve us all forever from all the enemies of our souls. I must not trust in the flesh, which perishes and abides not; but I will firmly trust in your word, this be my consolation, on which I rely; it shall deliver me, from all my distresses, to everlasting rest. The hour of the last day, to which we all must come, is at hand. Dear Lord, help us to bear the cross to the destined place, and turn yourself to us with all grace, that we may commend our spirit into your hands. I sincerely pray for all our enemies, O Lord, however many there may be; do not lay their sins to their charge; Lord, I entreat this according to your will. And thus we (I George Blaurock, and Hans von der Reve) will depart in peace. May the good God through grace lead us into his everlasting kingdom, as we firmly trust that he will, and finish his holy work in us and give us strength to the end, Amen. [^2]

[^2]: *The Bloody Theatre, or Martyrs Mirror of the Defenseless Christians*, pages 415-416

The second:
> God administers a righteous judgment, which no one can set aside, and he who does not do his will, he will judge. But you, O Lord, are good, and suffer yourself to be found gracious, and all those who use diligence to do your will, you accept as your children. We justly give praise and thanks to you, through Jesus Christ, for all your benefits and goodness, and beg you to preserve and guard us from sin. The sinner in this life brings a severe judgment upon himself, which he shall afterwards regret; for though God faithfully warns him, yet will he not forsake his sinful life; but when the Lord shall come in his glory to judge, then shall the sinner repent; for no excuse will then avail.
>
> He now causes his divine word to be published, and instructs men, that they should turn from their sinful life, believe in Christ, be baptized upon faith, and obey the good news. Therefore, you children of men, forsake your sins, and remain no longer hardened, sick, wicked and blind; now that you can find the physician, who can heal all infirmities, and avail yourselves of his help without money. O, how awful will it be with the sinner who now refuses help and counsel, when he shall be sentenced by God into everlasting pain, where he will have to remain and suffer forever and ever. But you, O Lord, are a righteous God. You will deceive no one, but will preserve those that sincerely love you, from the second death.
> 
> You, O Lord, are a strong God, who will cast into hell, which has now opened wide her mouth, all the wicked and those who hate and afflict your children. But your mercy is great over those who repent, and you, through Jesus Christ, forgive their sins. This is what God requires: that the whole human race should fear and love him, that they should follow his Son Jesus Christ, and observe his divine teaching. But when the sinner is exhorted to the love of God, he shows by the deed that he considers it a mockery; for this however he shall pay dearly, for God can not be deceived by appearance.
>
> Antichrist threatens those who fear God with great severity and humiliation. Therefore we beg you, O Lord, strengthen your feeble vessels: but we know, that if we patiently endure all this for your name’s sake, you, in your faithfulness, will not forsake us; but do renew and strengthen us daily, that we may continue on your narrow way. We cry to you through Christ, for the sake of his bitter suffering, in which we recognize your faithfulness and love; and this consoles us on our pilgrimage. Do not forsake us, your children, henceforth unto the end; but constantly offer us your Fatherly hand that we may finish our course; for when we have finished our course, the crown is prepared by the young man who hung on the cross for us, on which he suffered greatly for our sakes. Grant, O Lord, that we may be thankful, so that we may joyfully behold you, our Father. O Father, through grace you chose us, and did not despise to put us into your work; grant that, when the evening comes, that we may receive our wages with rejoicing.
> 
> Through Christ your Son make us ready for the heavenly supper, and clothe us with your Holy Spirit. In that supper, your Son, our Redeemer, shall serve us at the table. O, how blessed are they which are called to this supper, and who in all sorrow adhere to Christ unto the end, even as he steadfastly suffered for us on the cross; and thus it is with all his followers on the earth; and all who shall keep their wedding garment undefiled to the end. Upon their heads the young man shall set crowns. But he who is not clothed with this garment, when the King will inspect his guests, shall be sternly reproved, bound hand and foot, and cast into outer darkness. O Lord, give us true love so to walk, that when we come we will not find the door closed, as was the case with the foolish virgins, who had no oil in their lamps, and said: “Lord, open to us,” but could not go in: but that we may happily watch with the five wise virgins, and may also enter into the glorious marriage feast of eternal heavenly joy, when the King, with his trumpets, shall call and assemble his chosen ones. Therefore, O Zion, you holy church of God, see that you hold fast unto the end that which you have received, and keep yourself unspotted from sin, and you shall, through grace, receive the eternal crown. [^3]

[^3]: *The Bloody Theatre, or Martyrs Mirror of the Defenseless Christians*, pages 416-417
